🧭 Project Overview

In this project, we use Terraform to provision an Amazon Elastic Block Store (EBS) volume, which provides persistent block-level storage for EC2 instances.

Unlike instance storage (which is temporary), EBS volumes retain data even when the EC2 instance is stopped or terminated, making them essential for stateful applications.

🎯 Objective
Create an EBS volume using Terraform
Understand persistent block storage in AWS
Learn how storage is decoupled from compute
Understand how EBS supports production workloads

🧰 Technologies Used
Technology	Purpose
Terraform	Infrastructure as Code
AWS EBS	Persistent block storage
AWS EC2	Compute (optional attachment target)
AWS	Cloud platform

📌 Concept Explanation

An EBS (Elastic Block Store) volume is a virtual hard disk that you can attach to EC2 instances.

Key characteristics:
Persistent storage (data survives reboot)
Highly available within an Availability Zone
Can be attached/detached from EC2 instances
Supports snapshots for backup and recovery
Storage Architecture Overview
         AWS Cloud

     ┌───────────────┐
     │   EC2 Instance │
     └──────┬────────┘
            │
            ▼
     ┌───────────────┐
     │  EBS Volume    │
     │  (Persistent)  │
     └───────────────┘

The EC2 instance acts as compute, while the EBS volume provides persistent storage.

Why EBS Matters in DevOps

Without EBS:

Data is lost when an instance stops
Applications cannot maintain state
Databases cannot function reliably

With EBS:

Data persists independently of compute
Storage can be resized and managed dynamically
Backups can be created using snapshots
Infrastructure becomes more resilient
🛠️ Project Files
terraform-ebs/
├── main.tf
├── variables.tf
├── outputs.tf
└── README.md

Implementation
Step 1: Configure AWS Provider
provider "aws" {
  region = "us-east-1"
}
Step 2: Create EBS Volume
resource "aws_ebs_volume" "devops_volume" {
  availability_zone = "us-east-1a"
  size              = 10
  type              = "gp2"

  tags = {
    Name = "devops-ebs-volume"
  }
}
Explanation
availability_zone
availability_zone = "us-east-1a"

EBS volumes are AZ-specific, meaning they must be created in the same availability zone as the EC2 instance they will attach to.

size
size = 10

Defines the storage capacity in GB.

type
type = "gp2"

Specifies the volume type:

Type	Description
gp2	General Purpose SSD
gp3	Newer SSD (recommended)
io1/io2	High-performance workloads
sc1	Cold HDD
st1	Throughput optimized HDD
Step 3: Initialize Terraform
terraform init
Step 4: Validate Configuration
terraform validate
Step 5: Preview Changes
terraform plan
Step 6: Apply Configuration
terraform apply

Confirm:

yes
Step 7: Verify Deployment
terraform state list

Expected output:

aws_ebs_volume.devops_volume

You can also verify in AWS Console:

EC2 → Elastic Block Store → Volumes

🔐 Security Best Practices
Encrypt EBS volumes for sensitive workloads
Delete unused volumes to avoid unnecessary costs
Ensure correct attachment permissions via IAM roles
Use snapshots for backup and recovery strategies
Restrict volume access within the correct VPC and AZ boundaries
💰 Cost Awareness

You are billed for:

Provisioned storage (GB per month)
Provisioned IOPS (for performance types)
Snapshots stored in S3

Always delete unused volumes and snapshots to avoid unnecessary charges.

🏗️ Real-World Use Cases
Scenario	Description
Databases	MySQL, PostgreSQL, and persistent storage
File Systems	Shared application storage
Logging Systems: Persistent log retention
Kubernetes Nodes: Persistent volumes for pods
Enterprise Apps: Stateful backend systems

⚠️ Common Mistakes
❌ Creating volume in the wrong availability zone
❌ Forgetting to attach a volume to the EC2 instance
❌ Not deleting unused volumes (cost leak)
❌ Using the wrong volume type for workload
❌ Storing sensitive data without encryption

📚 Key Takeaways
EBS provides persistent storage for EC2 instances.
Storage is independent of the compute lifecycle.
Volumes are AZ-specific and must match the instance location.
Terraform allows full lifecycle management of storage resources.
EBS is essential for stateful applications like databases.

🚀 Summary
In this project, we provisioned an AWS EBS volume using Terraform, introducing persistent block storage in AWS. This demonstrated how cloud infrastructure separates compute and storage, enabling scalable and resilient application architectures.

💡 Senior DevOps Insight
At this stage, you are starting to see the real architecture of cloud systems:

EC2 = Compute
EBS = Storage
VPC = Network

In production systems, these are never treated independently. Instead, they form a cohesive infrastructure layer.

Experienced engineers think in terms of:

"What happens to my data if the instance fails?"

EBS solves that problem — but more importantly, it introduces the mindset of decoupling infrastructure components for resilience, scalability, and fault tolerance.
"What happens to my data if the instance fails?"

EBS solves that problem — but more importantly, it introduces the mindset of decoupling infrastructure components for resilience, scalability, and fault tolerance.
