🧭 Project Overview

In this project, we provision an Amazon Virtual Private Cloud (VPC) with a custom CIDR block using Terraform. Assigning a CIDR block defines the private IP address range within the VPC, enabling the creation of subnets, launching EC2 instances, 
and building scalable network architectures.

This project introduces one of the most fundamental networking concepts in cloud computing: IP address management.

🎯 Objective
Create an AWS VPC using Terraform
Assign a custom IPv4 CIDR block
Understand CIDR notation and private IP addressing
Learn why network planning is critical in cloud environments

🧰 Technologies Used
Technology	Purpose
Terraform	Infrastructure as Code (IaC)
AWS VPC	Virtual private network
CIDR	IP address allocation
AWS	Cloud platform

📌 Concept Explanation

Every VPC requires an IPv4 CIDR block, which defines the range of private IP addresses available within the network.

For example:

10.0.0.0/16

This means the VPC can allocate addresses from:

10.0.0.1
...
10.0.255.254

These addresses are private and are used by resources such as:

EC2 Instances
RDS Databases
Load Balancers
ECS Tasks
EKS Worker Nodes
Understanding CIDR Notation

CIDR (Classless Inter-Domain Routing) combines an IP address with a prefix length.

Example:

10.0.0.0/16

Where:

10.0.0.0 → Network address
/16 → First 16 bits identify the network

Common VPC CIDR sizes include:

CIDR	Approximate IP Addresses
/24	256
/20	4,096
/16	65,536

AWS reserves five IP addresses in every subnet, so the usable number is slightly lower.

Network Architecture
                     AWS Cloud
┌────────────────────────────────────┐
│                                    │
│      VPC (10.0.0.0/16)             │
│                                    │
│  ┌─────────────────────────────┐   │
│  │     Future Subnets          │   │
│  │                             │   │
│  │ 10.0.1.0/24                 │   │
│  │ 10.0.2.0/24                 │   │
│  │ 10.0.3.0/24                 │   │
│  └─────────────────────────────┘   │
│                                    │
└────────────────────────────────────┘

The VPC acts as the parent network, while subnets divide the address space into smaller segments for different workloads.

🛠️ Project Files
terraform-vpc-cidr/
├── main.tf
├── variables.tf
├── outputs.tf
└── README.md

Implementation
Step 1: Configure the AWS Provider
provider "aws" {
  region = "us-east-1"
}
Step 2: Define the VPC with a CIDR Block
resource "aws_vpc" "main" {
  cidr_block           = "10.0.0.0/16"
  enable_dns_support   = true
  enable_dns_hostnames = true

  tags = {
    Name = "devops-vpc"
  }
}
Explanation
cidr_block
cidr_block = "10.0.0.0/16"

Defines the private IPv4 address range available inside the VPC.

enable_dns_support

Allows resources inside the VPC to resolve domain names using AWS DNS.

enable_dns_hostnames

Assigns DNS hostnames to supported resources, such as EC2 instances.

Tags
tags = {
  Name = "devops-vpc"
}

Tags help identify, organize, and manage resources across AWS environments.

Step 3: Initialize Terraform
terraform init

Initializes the Terraform working directory and downloads the AWS provider.

Step 4: Validate Configuration
terraform validate

Ensures the configuration is syntactically correct.

Step 5: Preview Infrastructure
terraform plan

Displays the planned changes before they are applied.

Step 6: Deploy the VPC
terraform apply

Confirm by typing:

yes

Terraform creates the VPC with the specified CIDR block.

Step 7: Verify Deployment

Verify using Terraform:

terraform state list

Expected output:

aws_vpc.main

Or verify through the AWS Management Console:

VPC Dashboard → Your VPCs

📂 Terraform Workflow
Write Configuration
        │
        ▼
terraform init
        │
        ▼
terraform validate
        │
        ▼
terraform plan
        │
        ▼
terraform apply
        │
        ▼
VPC Created with CIDR Block

🔐 Security & Design Best Practices
Plan your IP address space before deploying resources.
Avoid overlapping CIDR ranges if connecting multiple VPCs or on-premises networks.
Reserve larger CIDR blocks when future expansion is expected.
Use private IP ranges defined by RFC 1918 (e.g., 10.0.0.0/8, 172.16.0.0/12, 192.168.0.0/16).
Separate environments (development, staging, production) into distinct VPCs where appropriate.

🏗️ Real-World Use Cases
Scenario	Description
Multi-Tier Applications	Allocate separate subnets for web, application, and database tiers
Enterprise Networks	Design scalable private IP address spaces
Hybrid Cloud	Prevent IP conflicts with on-premises infrastructure
Kubernetes Clusters	Provide address ranges for worker nodes and pods
Multi-Environment Deployments	Use different CIDR ranges for dev, staging, and production

⚠️ Common Mistakes
❌ Choosing a CIDR block too small for future growth
❌ Creating overlapping CIDR ranges across VPCs
❌ Not planning subnet allocation before deployment
❌ Using public IP ranges instead of private address spaces
❌ Ignoring future peering or VPN connectivity requirements

📚 Key Takeaways
A VPC requires a CIDR block to allocate private IP addresses.
CIDR planning is fundamental to AWS networking.
Terraform enables consistent and repeatable network provisioning.
Good IP address planning simplifies future expansion and connectivity.
The VPC and its CIDR block form the foundation for all subsequent networking resources.
🚀 Summary

In this project, we created an AWS Virtual Private Cloud with a custom IPv4 CIDR block using Terraform. This established the private network address space that future cloud resources will use, reinforcing Infrastructure as Code principles while introducing foundational cloud networking concepts.

💡 Senior DevOps Insight

One of the most common mistakes made by new cloud engineers is treating CIDR selection as an afterthought. In production environments, network planning happens before any infrastructure is deployed.

A poorly planned CIDR block can lead to:

IP exhaustion as the environment grows
Overlapping networks that prevent VPC peering
Challenges integrating with on-premises data centers
Costly network redesigns later in the project

Experienced DevOps engineers think beyond today's requirements. They design networks with future scalability, security, and interoperability in mind, ensuring the infrastructure can grow without requiring disruptive reconfiguration.
