🧭 Project Overview

In this project, we use Terraform to create an Amazon Machine Image (AMI) from an existing EC2 instance. An AMI is a reusable template that contains an operating system, installed software, and configurations.

This concept is fundamental in DevOps because it enables immutable infrastructure, where servers are not manually configured but instead launched from pre-built images.

🎯 Objective
Create an AMI from an existing EC2 instance using Terraform
Understand image-based infrastructure provisioning
Learn the concept of immutable infrastructure
Enable repeatable and scalable server deployments

🧰 Technologies Used
Technology	Purpose
Terraform	Infrastructure as Code
AWS EC2	Source instance
AWS AMI	Machine image template
AWS	Cloud platform

📌 Concept Explanation

An Amazon Machine Image (AMI) is a snapshot of a running EC2 instance that includes:

Operating system
Installed packages
Application code (if any)
Configuration settings

Once created, an AMI can be used to launch identical EC2 instances.

Why AMIs Matter in DevOps

Without AMIs:

Every server must be configured manually
Deployments are inconsistent
Scaling is slow and error-prone

With AMIs:

Servers are pre-configured
Deployment is fast and consistent
Infrastructure becomes repeatable and versioned
AMI Lifecycle Concept
      EC2 Instance
           │
           ▼
   Configure & Install Apps
           │
           ▼
     Create AMI Snapshot
           │
           ▼
   Reusable Machine Image
           │
           ▼
  Launch Multiple EC2 Instances
🛠️ Project Files
terraform-ami/
├── main.tf
├── variables.tf
├── outputs.tf
└── README.md
Implementation
Step 1: Configure AWS Provider
provider "aws" {
  region = "us-east-1"
}
Step 2: Reference Existing EC2 Instance
data "aws_instance" "source" {
  instance_id = "i-0123456789abcdef0"
}
Step 3: Create AMI from EC2 Instance
resource "aws_ami_from_instance" "devops_ami" {
  name               = "devops-custom-ami"
  source_instance_id = data.aws_instance.source.id

  tags = {
    Name = "devops-ami"
  }
}
Explanation
data "aws_instance"
data "aws_instance" "source"

This retrieves information about an existing EC2 instance that will be used as the source for the AMI.

aws_ami_from_instance
resource "aws_ami_from_instance" "devops_ami"

This creates a machine image from the selected EC2 instance.

source_instance_id
source_instance_id = data.aws_instance.source.id

Specifies which EC2 instance will be used as the base for the AMI.

name
name = "devops-custom-ami"

Defines a name for the AMI so it can be identified in AWS.

Step 4: Initialize Terraform
terraform init

Step 5: Validate Configuration
terraform validate

Step 6: Preview Infrastructure
terraform plan

Step 7: Apply Configuration
terraform apply

Confirm:

yes
Step 8: Verify AMI Creation
terraform state list

Expected output:

aws_ami_from_instance.devops_ami

You can also verify in AWS Console:

EC2 → AMIs → Owned by me

🔐 Security Best Practices
Ensure the source instance is hardened before creating AMIs.
Remove sensitive data before image creation.
Avoid embedding credentials inside AMIs.
Tag AMIs for version tracking.
Regularly clean up unused AMIs to reduce storage costs.
💰 Cost Awareness

AMIs are stored in Amazon S3-backed snapshots, and you are billed for:

Snapshot storage
AMI versions retained over time

Always delete outdated AMIs and snapshots to control costs.

🏗️ Real-World Use Cases
Scenario	Description
Auto Scaling Groups	Launch identical pre-configured instances
CI/CD Pipelines	Deploy standardized environments
Production Systems	Immutable infrastructure strategy
Disaster Recovery	Recreate environments quickly
Machine Standardization	Ensure consistent server configurations
⚠️ Common Mistakes
❌ Using an unverified or misconfigured instance as AMI source
❌ Forgetting to clean sensitive data before image creation
❌ Leaving old AMIs and snapshots behind
❌ Using AMIs without version control strategy
❌ Not tagging AMIs for lifecycle management
📚 Key Takeaways
AMIs are reusable templates for EC2 instances.
They enable immutable infrastructure in AWS.
Terraform can automate AMI creation from EC2 instances.
AMIs improve scalability, consistency, and deployment speed.
Proper lifecycle management is critical to avoid cost buildup.
🚀 Summary

In this project, we created an AWS AMI from an existing EC2 instance using Terraform. This introduced the concept of immutable infrastructure, enabling consistent and repeatable deployments across cloud environments.

💡 Senior DevOps Insight

At scale, no serious DevOps team manually configures servers.

Instead, they rely on:

Golden Images (AMIs)
Immutable Infrastructure
Automated Deployment Pipelines

The real power of AMIs is not just creating images — it is enabling:

“Every server is identical, reproducible, and disposable.”

This eliminates configuration drift, reduces deployment errors, and allows infrastructure to be rebuilt in minutes rather than hours or days.

Once you understand AMIs, you start thinking less about servers and more about versioned infrastructure artifacts.
