🧭 Project Overview

In this project, we use Terraform to provision an AWS EC2 Key Pair using Infrastructure as Code (IaC). Instead of manually creating a key pair through the AWS Management Console, 
Terraform allows us to define the resource declaratively and deploy it consistently across environments.

This introduces one of the core DevOps principles: automating infrastructure provisioning.

🎯 Objective
Create an AWS EC2 Key Pair using Terraform
Store the public key in AWS
Understand the role of SSH key pairs in cloud environments
Learn how Terraform manages cloud resources declaratively

🧰 Technologies Used
Technology	Purpose
Terraform	Infrastructure as Code (IaC)
AWS EC2	Compute service
SSH	Secure remote server access
AWS Key Pair	Authentication for EC2 instances

📌 Concept Explanation

A Key Pair in AWS consists of:

Public Key → Stored securely in AWS
Private Key → Stored locally by the administrator

When an EC2 instance is launched, AWS injects the public key into the instance. The administrator then uses the corresponding private key to authenticate securely via SSH.

            AWS
      ┌──────────────┐
      │ Public Key   │
      └──────┬───────┘
             │
      Launch EC2 Instance
             │
             ▼
      ┌──────────────┐
      │ EC2 Instance │
      └──────┬───────┘
             ▲
             │ SSH Authentication
             │
      ┌──────────────┐
      │ Private Key  │
      │ (Local PC)   │
      └──────────────┘
Why Key Pairs Matter

Unlike traditional servers that use usernames and passwords, cloud environments rely heavily on SSH key-based authentication because it provides:

Stronger security than passwords
Protection against brute-force attacks
Secure automation for DevOps workflows
Authentication without transmitting passwords over the network

This is why AWS requires a key pair when launching most Linux EC2 instances.

🛠️ Project Files
terraform-keypair/
├── main.tf
├── variables.tf
├── outputs.tf
└── README.md

Implementation
Step 1: Define the AWS Provider
provider "aws" {
  region = "us-east-1"
}

This tells Terraform which cloud provider to interact with and the AWS region where resources will be created.

Step 2: Create the Key Pair Resource
resource "aws_key_pair" "devops_kp" {
  key_name   = "devops-kp"
  public_key = file("~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub")
}
Explanation
aws_key_pair → Terraform resource for AWS EC2 key pairs
key_name → Name displayed in the AWS Console
public_key → Reads the local public key file and uploads it to AWS

Note: Terraform uploads only the public key. Your private key remains on your local machine and should never be committed to version control.

Step 3: Initialize Terraform
terraform init

This downloads the AWS provider plugin and initializes the working directory.

Step 4: Validate Configuration
terraform validate

This checks the configuration for syntax errors before deployment.

Step 5: Preview Infrastructure
terraform plan

This generates an execution plan showing what Terraform intends to create without making changes.

Step 6: Deploy Infrastructure
terraform apply

Type:

yes

Terraform creates the AWS Key Pair.

Step 7: Verify Deployment

Confirm the resource exists:

terraform state list

Expected output:

aws_key_pair.devops_kp

You can also verify the key pair in the AWS Management Console under:

EC2 → Network & Security → Key Pairs

📂 Terraform Resource Lifecycle

One of the key concepts introduced in this project is Terraform's resource lifecycle:

Write Configuration
        │
        ▼
terraform init
        │
        ▼
terraform validate
        │
        ▼
terraform plan
        │
        ▼
terraform apply
        │
        ▼
Infrastructure Created

This workflow is followed for nearly every Terraform deployment.

🔐 Security Best Practices
Never commit private keys (id_rsa) to Git repositories.
Store private keys securely with appropriate file permissions (chmod 600).
Use descriptive key names for different environments (e.g., dev, staging, prod).
Rotate SSH keys periodically.
Prefer IAM roles or cloud-native identity mechanisms over SSH where possible.

🏗️ Real-World Use Cases
Scenario	Description
EC2 Administration: Secure SSH access to Linux instances
CI/CD Pipelines	Automated infrastructure provisioning
Infrastructure Automation: Consistent key management across environments
Disaster Recovery: Recreate infrastructure from code
Multi-Environment Deployments	Standardized access for development, staging, and production

⚠️ Common Mistakes
❌ Uploading the private key instead of the public key
❌ Committing SSH keys to GitHub
❌ Using an incorrect file path with the file() function
❌ Forgetting to initialize Terraform before planning
❌ Hardcoding environment-specific values instead of using variables

📚 Key Takeaways
Terraform provisions cloud infrastructure declaratively.
AWS Key Pairs enable secure SSH authentication to EC2 instances.
Only the public key is stored in AWS.
The standard Terraform workflow is:
terraform init
terraform validate
terraform plan
terraform apply
Key pairs are foundational for securely managing cloud servers.

🚀 Summary

In this project, we provisioned an AWS EC2 Key Pair using Terraform, replacing manual console-based configuration with Infrastructure as Code. 
This exercise introduced the Terraform workflow, demonstrated secure SSH authentication principles, and established a foundation for future AWS infrastructure projects, such as launching EC2 instances, 
configuring networking, and automating cloud deployments.
