🧭 Project Overview

In this project, we use Terraform to provision an AWS Elastic IP (EIP), which is a static public IPv4 address that can be attached to cloud resources such as EC2 instances.

Unlike normal public IPs, Elastic IPs remain persistent even if the instance is stopped or restarted, making them essential for stable public-facing applications.

🎯 Objective
Create an Elastic IP using Terraform
Understand static vs dynamic public IP addressing
Learn how AWS manages public connectivity
Understand use cases for fixed IP assignment in cloud infrastructure

🧰 Technologies Used
Technology	Purpose
Terraform	Infrastructure as Code (IaC)
AWS EC2	Compute service
AWS Elastic IP	Static public IPv4 address
AWS	Cloud platform

📌 Concept Explanation

An Elastic IP (EIP) is a static IPv4 address provided by AWS that can be associated with:

EC2 instances
Network interfaces
NAT Gateways
Key characteristics:
Persistent (does not change when instance restarts)
Manually allocated and released
Can be reassigned to different resources
Elastic IP vs Normal Public IP
Feature	Public IP	Elastic IP
Persistence	Temporary	Persistent
Change on restart	Yes	No
Reassignment	No	Yes
Use case	Short-lived instances	Production workloads
🛠️ Architecture Overview
        AWS Cloud

     ┌───────────────┐
     │ Elastic IP    │
     │ 3.120.x.x     │
     └──────┬────────┘
            │
            ▼
     ┌───────────────┐
     │ EC2 Instance   │
     │ Web Server     │
     └───────────────┘

The Elastic IP ensures the EC2 instance always has a stable public endpoint.

🛠️ Project Files
terraform-eip/
├── main.tf
├── variables.tf
├── outputs.tf
└── README.md

Implementation
Step 1: Configure AWS Provider
provider "aws" {
  region = "us-east-1"
}
Step 2: Create Elastic IP
resource "aws_eip" "devops_eip" {
  domain = "vpc"

  tags = {
    Name = "devops-eip"
  }
}
Explanation
domain = "vpc"
domain = "vpc"

Specifies that the Elastic IP is allocated for use within a VPC environment (modern AWS standard).

Tags
tags = {
  Name = "devops-eip"
}

Used for identification, automation, and cost tracking.

Step 3: Initialize Terraform
terraform init

Downloads required provider plugins.

Step 4: Validate Configuration
terraform validate

Ensures the configuration is syntactically correct.

Step 5: Preview Infrastructure
terraform plan

Shows what Terraform will create before applying changes.

Step 6: Apply Configuration
terraform apply

Confirm:

yes

Terraform allocates a static public IP from AWS.

Step 7: Verify Deployment
terraform state list

Expected output:

aws_eip.devops_eip

You can also verify in AWS Console:

EC2 → Elastic IPs

🔐 Security Best Practices
Release unused Elastic IPs to avoid unnecessary costs.
Avoid exposing unnecessary services to the public internet.
Associate EIPs only with properly secured instances.
Use Security Groups to restrict access even when EIP is assigned.
Track and document all public IP usage for governance.

💰 Cost Awareness (Important)

AWS charges for Elastic IPs when:

They are allocated but not attached to a running instance
You exceed free-tier limits

Always release unused Elastic IPs in non-production environments.

🏗️ Real-World Use Cases

Scenario	Description
Web Servers	Stable public endpoint for websites
Bastion Hosts	Secure SSH gateway to private networks
APIs	Fixed IP for external integrations
Legacy Systems	IP whitelisting requirements
DNS Mapping	Static IP linked to domain names

⚠️ Common Mistakes
❌ Leaving unused Elastic IPs allocated (cost leakage)
❌ Assuming EIP replaces Security Groups (it does not)
❌ Attaching EIP to incorrect instance
❌ Not documenting public IP usage
❌ Exposing instances publicly without firewall rules

📚 Key Takeaways
Elastic IPs provide static public IP addresses in AWS.
They are essential for stable public-facing services.
Terraform allows Elastic IPs to be managed as code.
EIPs must be carefully managed to avoid unnecessary costs.
Security Groups are still required even when using EIPs.

🚀 Summary
In this project, we provisioned an AWS Elastic IP using Terraform, enabling a static and persistent public IP address for cloud resources. This introduced the concept of stable internet-facing infrastructure and reinforced the importance of controlled public exposure in cloud environments.

💡 Senior DevOps Insight
One key difference between beginners and experienced cloud engineers is how they handle public exposure.

Beginners often think:

"I need a public IP so my server can be accessed."

Experienced engineers think:

"If this resource must be public, how do I minimize exposure, control traffic, and ensure I can rotate or migrate it without downtime?"

Elastic IPs are powerful, but in modern cloud architecture, they are used sparingly and deliberately—often replaced with load balancers, DNS routing, and auto-scaling architectures.

Understanding when NOT to use an Elastic IP is just as important as knowing how to create one.
